AI100 Report: SQ9-Promising Potentials for Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence (AI) is poised to upend numerous industries or facets of society through incredible inventions and innovations. The SQ9 of the One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence 2021 Study Panel Report exemplifies the technology's potential based on its seemingly endless possibilities. The report's underpinnings revolve around the sociotechnical applications of AI: in argumentation and autonomous agents. In both cases, the benefits of computer algorithms are harnessed in functionalities that impact people's lives or society in general. This work aims to draw attention to the novelty of AI while also challenging and addressing apparent concerns in the report.

The argumentation potential of AI algorithms parallels the capabilities of computers and humans to overcome either individual weaknesses. It combines computer-aided analysis of complex data to streamline, summarize, and find patterns and linkages with human interpretation and application. According to the report, this AI-human compatibility has many uses, including providing insights, guiding decisions, forecasting, and assistive technology. Without a doubt, computer algorithms can analyze a vast amount of data and unravel seemingly invisible associations. However, because humans design such algorithms, the judging accuracy of such systems is subject to further interrogations. Developers of AI algorithms create and train models to achieve preset goals. As a result, the systems are vulnerable to accidental human biases influenced by predetermined objectives (Hauer, 2022). Additionally, AI offers a tenable method for predicting the long-term effects of current decisions in fields like banking and healthcare. Despite giving such priceless data for the future, AI-human-based forecasting algorithms nevertheless face severe downsides. For instance, Losbichler and Lehner (2021) criticize that AI-based econometric systems rely on visible variables. The models can only process and operate on known conditions; as a result, they cannot forecast the unknowns. Therefore, regardless of how successfully AI systems foresee future events, they are susceptible to substantial uncertainties.

The report also claims that autonomous AI models are always more efficient than systems incorporating human enhancements with AI; however, this is not always true. Numerous instances have shown that human abilities are superior to stand-alone computer algorithms, leaving alone AI-human compatible systems. Academic creativity is one such field where human authors exceed computer innovation in text generation (like books, essays, and journals). As Hauer (2022) underpins, AI text generation models like Babel Generator have the same problem with missing context. These models can produce grammatically accurate material but lacking in scientific purpose. However, complex systems independent of human control, like autonomous cars, have been developed using AI capabilities. The main goal is to reduce human mistakes and increase safety by leveraging the superior decision-making capabilities of computer algorithms. While the idea is noble, trusting a computer with a fragile human life is quite troublesome. The ability of autonomous systems to make moral judgments and handle spontaneous yet unusual situations has long been a source of serious concern (Cunneen et al., 2019). Therefore, when autonomous vehicles fail to make the necessary split-second choice in every unique highway case, passengers may be exposed to unintentional injuries and fatalities.

In sum, AI is a marvel of technology that offers limitless potential for improving humankind. AI sociotechnical systems can enhance professional decision-making skills and ameliorate the lives of the ill and the disabled. On the other hand, AI technology is the key enabler of innovation and productivity across numerous spheres of life. Although the importance of AI cannot be overstated, systems that directly affect people should allow for human discretion and judgment. This is because AI algorithms will never be perfect, despite the increasing accuracy of computer judgment.
